---
title: "Crusader Kings III"
date: 2025-10-20
draft: false
---

Imagine you don't have much time in your real life, so you want to play avoiding conflicts at an early stage that are very slow to solve. You want to start playing peacefully, make yourself very wealthy, and then crush your enemies decisively.

You want a challenge, not starting with the most powerful at recent times, but to **start small and early** and see the progression. There is no fun if there is no progression strategy!

**In CK3, you can have a large empire and be weak**. You depend on the loyalty of your vassals, and that's always a problem when you are no longer the respected emperor with a long reign and great reputation, but the young son with attributes that generate hatred in some vassals. Without vassals, you are equally strong, and less strong if vassals join together.

That's because the number of counties you have is not very different from the counties your vassals have. **The wealth generated by these counties is what makes you really powerful, not the size of your collapsing empire**.

How do you get your counties wealthy? Build on them. How much can you build at early stages? Very, very little.

To be able to build more and better, you need **cultural advancements** thanks to the **development** of your culture's counties.

The trick is, if the innovation unlocking speed is based on the overall development of a culture’s counties, **you can make a culture exist in only one county and maximize the speed of development of new innovations**.

So you could get a raiding Viking in England who is already Feudal at 867 AD, go to the Canary Islands, accept his culture because it has a bonus on development in his terrain, and teach your kid the culture of a Jewish culture with no territories and convert the island to that culture. Voilà, you have 1 county culture with a large army and a special building that gives a development increase!

You set a great steward to increase development, build all the buildings that give development, and make all your rules to have a lot of Learning skill with a spouse with a lot of Learning skill. You can **easily sit at 40 Learning skill**.

You have 4 wives, a lot of children who can be counselors (men and women) in your single county, and nobody internally can threaten you.

# Some numbers

Now, with all of these tricks, how many years do you have to wait to unlock your first innovation?

15 years. Every month is 3 seconds, so 3 × 12 × 15 / 60 = **9 minutes waiting for the tech to complete**.

Well, other interesting things will surely happen…

The only thing that will happen again and again is you have a new child. You have to set their Learning focus. Your child can have a guardian; choose the guardian with the highest Learning skill. You would easily have 10+ children, plus grandchildren… and you cannot automate this. That's boooring as hell.

If I wanted a caring game, I would play The Sims, which would be funnier and less demanding.

But okay, you keep on that from 900 AD until 1150 AD — **2.5 hours without interruptions, maybe 5 hours with interruptions**.

You got the whole tech tree now? Oooh nooo, **you got STUCK!** The game, for whatever reason, decides you got all the possible techs, but you cannot advance to Late Medieval until 1200 AD. Why? Because reasons. God’s divine plan, I guess. Humans cannot develop civic development primogeniture, of course — that would be completely crazy to think.

So if you want to wait **5 hours doing family micromanagement to get stuck in arbitrary rules**, this is your game.

# How the "game" tricks your brain

For example, to unlock civic key developments that can really change the rulers' behavior on the map, you need to wait until 1200. The game presents itself as a sandbox, but in reality, you have to play the historical way it was intended. **The challenges come from many arbitrary limitations so as not to break the narrative**.

**You are not playing a sandbox, you are part of the the sandbox.**